Welcome everyone who has come and is here and before we begin, as usual, connecting with
our motivation more, our joy, our appreciation for this very sacred, fleeting moment with
trust and faith in the inevitability of karma and with vast bodhichitta, thinking of all
beings, that this time together can really be of great benefit. We can all be in this
life and leave this life, leaving only just good fruits benefiting everyone and then connecting
to with our purity vision and our awe and devotion and re-establishing kind of the view
of all the great purity within the vastness of our mind, its clarity, its vastness, its
all-pervading compassion that's just inseparable from everything. And then again with the great
bodhichitta motivation that we can really have clear understanding of that and all beings
can have that, which brings peace.
So we usually spend a little bit, maybe 15 or 20-so minutes just to reflect a little bit
on the teachings we've heard and are practicing. And then we'll actually do our practice together.
So again, my knowledge is limited, our time is limited. I've said it before, I'll say
it again, I'm here speaking a few reflections, but always, it's always a little daunting
and humbling. The Dharma is so vast, even just a glimpse. So each one, everyone here has
heard the teachings, has great connections, has studied, reflected and practiced the teachings.
So of course, anything that I say, it's to the best of my abilities, but of course there's
so much more and everyone has their own direct experience. So I'm just saying this, just
trying to be good support and just keeping that in mind. We're all here for the practice
and the teachings and it is so rich. And as we've been doing these nundra practices, as
you all know, we've been kind of reflecting on things that can really help connect in
a more authentic, simple, down to earth way with the teachings and the practice. So part
of that has been also just kind of going through the different sections in the nundra. And
so I've been kind of slowly going through the different sections of the nundra. Like
we all know, there's the outer nundra, the four thoughts that turn the mind, which is
always excellent, always important. Kempo Sewong Rinpoche says in one voice with all
the lineage masters, really the power of reflecting on the four thoughts really sets our Dharma
practice on a firm and reliable ground because it's really looking at really the facts of
life and kind of brings that clarity, that warmth and moisture and appreciation to our
heart. So we've talked about that before, but again I'll say that now. If you've never
heard of the four thoughts, then you can find endless teachings on them. But most important
is we reflect on them before we begin any practice or study. And this definitely has
its own place in our nundra practice. And then doing that, we are turning our mind toward
the Dharma and then we take refuge as the first section of the nundra practice. And
then again, just as a quick review, we all know refuge is the gateway to all the Buddha's
teachings and practices. No matter where, no matter which lineage of study and practice
on this earth that are existing, they all come from the great teacher, Buddha Shakyamuni.
And every one of those lineages entails refuge, which is what is just our basic trust and
confidence in the Buddha, in the teachings of the Buddha and everyone who's maintaining
and supporting, upholding, deepening their understanding for themselves and each other,
the meaning and realization of the teachings, which is what is removing all our obscurations,
bringing out our great clarity. We all have just limited vision right now, just tiny little
like Rinpoche says, like looking through the hole, the size of a sesame seed at the universe.
But that's just our current limitation. We're all opening to that. So turning our mind,
having some connection with the Buddha, you know. So during our refuge practice, we're
visualizing Guru Padmasambhava and all the lineage trees as the embodiment of the Three
Jewels, Guru Padmasambhava as the embodiment of all the Buddhas of the three times of past,
present, future, as the embodiment and realization of all the teachings and mandalas of the deities
and the embodiment of all the Sangha. And so this is so rich on so many different levels.
So we've been kind of slowly, very tiny again within our limited time, just reflecting on
what is a Buddha, what are the different aspects of Buddha. And that's the last time I spoke
at least was a little bit on the Dharma. And then Mama Draupa gave wonderful talk last
week really going through the different aspects of Dharma teachings and view. And then so
now where that kind of puts us at Sangha to just reflect upon a little bit. So from now
until attaining the heart of enlightenment, I take refuge in the Lama, the Three Jewels.
So when we're taking refuge in the Sangha, I mean, on the most outer level, the Sangha
is everyone who's trying to take the Buddhist teachings to heart. So that means both those
who've really realized those great teachings and those who are on the way. So within Sangha
there's two basic groupings of Sangha. There's ordinary Sangha, such as like myself, someone
who aspires to realize the teachings and bring them all more into my direct realization for
the benefit of everyone everywhere. And then there's the Noble Sangha, those great beings
who've actually realized it. So that would be who, the our hearts, those who've realized
selflessness, all the bodhisattvas who are going through all the Bhumis, all the Buddhas,
all the fully awakened ones. When the Buddhas are our Sangha, the bodhisattvas are our Sangha,
the our hearts are our Sangha, we have the Sangha we can experience here in this world
and have the great fortune to meet through these great realization beings, such as Kenpo
Sewon Dondel Rinpoche, Kinchin Paulden Rinpoche, His Holiness Dudrim Rinpoche, so many. And
how fortunate. And the Sangha goes all the way right to the Buddha without Sangha on
the outer level. We wouldn't have the teachings. Just like it goes back to just that's part
of our, the great wealth that we have as practitioners within, you know, our endowments and
freedoms.
The Buddha appeared in this world, the teachings remain and those who are kind, who share them
and support each other to the best of their abilities. So it's kind of, again, just like
all Dharma kind of obvious, but just how beautiful to see that and highlight that, that we really
are connected to an unbroken living lineage, unbroken all the way back to Buddha Shakyamuni
and through Buddha Shakyamuni throughout all beyond the three times to the pure essence
of wisdom and compassion shining brightly and unimpededly. And it's due to that joy, devotion,
courage and commitment of each one of those practitioners that came from, you know, India,
throughout India into Tibet, circulating into that coming out into the world, meeting us
in this life. So we too are Sangha. And so that's kind of on one outer level of remembering
that. And then kind of looking at what are the word meanings of Sangha? I think, you know,
one thing I know Rinpoche has said in Sanskrit, the word Sangha, one meaning is inseparable.
Just think for yourself kind of how beautiful. Inseparable. It's like our karma brings us
together, our motivation brings us together, our practice brings us together. We're taking
responsibility for our entire experience. It means we do have some trust in the inseparability
of the nature of our mind and its appearances. And then also then when the Sangha is translated
into Tibetan, and that's this Tibetan word of Sangha is I think gendun. And literally
what does that mean? It means those who aspire to virtue. So just remembering that as Sangha,
we're all aspiring to virtue. And what is virtue? But essentially, I think we could
say being authentic, being natural, being loving, being compassionate, being forgiving,
being open, trying to engage and practice all the six paramitas. And so we all know
we're all here as Sangha. We can support each other. And that support comes mainly of course
taking responsibility with how we meet our practice, both our formal practice as well
as the practice of just being alive and with a mind with the freedoms and endowments and
this precious opportunity. And then so keeping our joy, keeping our appreciation and also
our courage and our commitment. Because as we all know, as Sangha, that doesn't always
mean we always agree or see things the same way. But we're still inseparable in one family
with the same vision, with the same goals, with the same values. So letting that really
open up and purify and give some air and breath to any kind of misunderstandings we can have
and reuse the opportunities we have and interacting, you know, to just kind of really take the
Dharma to heart and really see directly the meaning. I think to then another aspect of
inseparable and aspiring to virtue, kind of in that same line. Again, I think many of
us have heard it, but again, good to remember. And Rinpoche said in the Guiagarbha Tantra,
the way Sangha is really explained. I guess one point I'll step back and the Guiagarbha
Tantra is kind of the source mother Tantra of all the inner Tantras and is especially
showing in one way, just in general, how all outer appearances are the mandala of enlightenment,
all forms, sounds, space. So within Sangha, it's kind of put out, there's what's called
the distant Sangha. And what is that with our bodhichitta? That means every single living
being is our Sangha. Is there to support our awakening? And they're here to support our
awakening, all mother sentient beings. And then there's the inner Sangha, I think or
inner Sangha. And that would be on a more Buddhist sense, all the followers of the teachings
of Buddha Shakyamuni. Or maybe one could even go a little further, all those who follow
a path of love, kindness, non-violence, respect. Then there's the close Sangha. So again, like
we know within all Buddhist teachings and practices, there's many. There's Hinayana,
there are Vedan Sangha, there's Mahayana Sangha, there's Vajrayana Sangha. So again, here we
are inseparable from all three yanas, all nine yanas, but we are Vajrayana practitioners,
or at least aspiring for that. So that means the close Sangha are all the practitioners
and students of the Vajrayana. And then it gets even closer, within all the lineages
and great masters of Vajrayana, there's the really intimate close Sangha. And that means
all the Sangha members who share the same teachers, the same teacher. We've all received
empowerment together. We've received the transmission together. We've received the same vows and
committed to the same vows and goals together. We've received the same instructions to take
to heart and we're all practicing together. That's very close and very profound. And that's
like if we look to just that even within Vajrayana, right, every 10th day and 25th day, every
soak ceremony, where we always purify our mistakes. And so we have the, like in our root Samayas,
what's the number one Samaya is respecting our root teacher. And then what's the third?
You know, the third Samaya, the closeness and the importance of maintaining harmony with
all our Sangha sisters and brothers and purifying any misunderstandings or trouble that's come
up through our mishandling and forgetting our bodhicitta and our view and etc, etc, etc.
So that's, you know, profound because again, within the view, we're really taking responsibility
for everything. Everything is the practice. Everything is the purity mandala of enlightenment.
So that's one angle of thought. And then to Kim Po Se Wong Rinpoche was so kind, so generous,
has given so many teachings and continues to. And then he's so more recently given these
teachings, the heart treasure to the fortunate ones and gone over for so such detail, these
four everlasting wealths of the practitioners, of Dharma practitioners. And if we kind of
recall to what Dajjalman Pashay is saying there, what are those is in that, again, remembering
the topic here is Sangha. So that's devotion to the root teacher. Again, again, we can
be calling Guru Patmasambhava to mind, but also the great kindness ones who actually
appear in our life, like in ways we can connect, but who are all embodied as Patmasambhava.
So, devotion to the root teacher. And then the second, love and affection for Samaya
brothers and sisters. Really keeping that in our mind and heart in an authentic way,
you know, to the best of our abilities. And then again, bodhicitta and compassion for
all sentient beings. And then the fourth is connected, but it's again, one of these four
wealths just to remember the full four, because again, these are pointed out. If we have these
things, we're incredibly wealthy. The fourth is kind of less grasping due to the fact we've
actually contemplated how all compounded things are impermanent. So, for everlasting wealths,
devotion to the root teacher, love and affection for Samaya sisters and brothers, bodhicitta
and compassion for all sentient beings, less grasping by contemplating impermanence. So,
as we are taking refuge, we're taking refuge in the Lama as embodiment of the three jewels
from now until we attain enlightenment. And that's the bond we keep with our teacher of
this life and all of our Samaya brothers and sisters. So good to keep that open and clear
and honest and trust that because we really are together in this. I think another aspect
of Sangha that's also helpful to reflect on is maybe on a little more related, but as
far as with ourselves. Sangha in the sense of, if we think of, as we take refuge in the
true nature fully realized as Guru Padmasambhava, that's inseparable from our very nature, just
as it realized it. We're taking refuge in all the Dharmakaya Buddhas, all the Sambhogakaya
Buddhas, all the Nirmanakaya Buddhas. Here I've been mostly talking on Nirmanakaya level.
And again, just reflecting on Nirmanakaya, that's the emanation of wisdom and compassion.
That is how the Dharmakaya and Sambhogakaya is reaching out to all sentient beings whose
vision is limited. So again, those can appear as Guru Padmasambhava, as our root teacher,
as the teachings, as the books, as the images, anything that's turning our mind toward the
Dharma. And like we all know, as we take the Dharma more and more to our mind and heart
and applying our meditation to the view and with our conduct, that means there's nothing
outside of the display of compassion and support. Guru Padmasambhava in other words is all-perv
ading.
If we take that, just awakenness and vividness, try to bring that to our mind and our heart
as we're taking that, that trust and devotion and courage and commitment that we have in
all of our experience. And then also on the level of the inner level of our body, our
channels, our winds, our essence element. Our body in a way is Sangha. Our winds are like
Dharma. Our essence element is like Buddha. And it's all, again, getting back to that
view of everything appearing in our heart, in our experience, as the display of compassion
to support our awakening. That's also referring too to this other level. We talk, we don't
say it in the prayer, from now until enlightenment I take refuge in the Lama, the three jewels.
But then also again as Vajrayana practitioners, that means we're also taking refuge in the
three roots, which is just again another way of looking at the Buddha, Dharma, Sangha.
And what are the three roots we've all, I think we all know? The root of all blessings
is the Lama. The root of all realization is the deity or the Yidam. The root of all enlightened
activity is the Dakini or root or source, source of all blessings, the Lama, which is
equal to the Buddha whose omniscience and power and abilities are completely unhindered, omniscient
,
and all-pervading as compassion shining out, reaching out, that the five wisdom's blazing
shining as all the mandalas of the deities, fully realized, fruition, is the source of
all realization, the Yidam, the Dharma, the source of all enlightened activity, the Dakini,
the outreaching energy of compassion and activity, all everything appearing, all forms are the
display of compassion inseparable from the great sky of emptiness. So just reflecting
on that a little as we're doing that and how it all comes back to Guru Padmasambhava whose
looking at us with such love, such compassion, such joy. And if we just think about it ourselves,
like if we have a friend or a child or a loved one that we truly love and value and we want
the best for them. We want their fulfillment, like if we really connect, if you just, we
do that, think of someone we love and adore and we really want to be happy. What does
that really mean on the deepest level? Of course, this temporary fulfillment and peace,
but like really that ultimate peace of removing our obscurations and bringing out our innate
goodness qualities which are there from beginningless, beginning, just fully developed and
completely
purified. That's what everyone who loves us wants for us and it's up for us to do that.
Just like those we love, they may be suffering or going through hard times and we can do
what we can, but it's up to them to find that peace. And of course, however we can support
that, but also kind of bringing that as we're doing our prayer. Guru Padmasambhava is looking
at that with omniscient love, omniscient compassion, all-pervading. And it's up to us and our
devotion,
like they say, is the door, you know, receives the hook of compassion. Our devotion opens
the door to all the blessings, all the realizations and brings, you know, which we can take to
our practice, take to our mind and heart to develop that. And then hopefully we can, by
maturing that in ourselves, we can bring even more good benefit and support to others. So
maybe I will cease my little talking now and we can actually do our practice. So thank
you and forgive me for any unfinished lines of thought, but just trying to reach out a
little and bring thoughts on the Sangha, taking refuge in the Sangha together. So we'll just
sit for a moment and then we'll begin our practice.
"Om Ojinnu jinnu chan sam, ped ma gesar dum pola, yajinnu jinnu dukni, ped ma jyunni sesudak,
kodu kandro maim burkor, jijijesudaku ji, jinnji lokjeshe ksu sol, kudu ped ma siddi home,
samantabhadra, vadrasattva, promatavhadra, sri-singa, padmakara, 25 king and subjects, sozur, nubny
ak,
one hundred tertons and others, lamas of kama and tourmalineages. To you I pray, inseparable.
In the past you were the Vidyadhara and in Dorjetsal. In the future you will be the Buddha
Mopataye. Now you are the regent of Padmasambhava, the actual presence of Dropan Lotsawa. Jijayashe
Dorje. To you I pray, happy with little, content and rich in jewels of the three trainings,
with loving compassion, seeing all beings as parents. Through three-fold realization
you made three doors, three vatras. Virtuous monk, Pema Sotram, to you I pray. The supreme
tradition of the glorious Buddha, Padmasambhava, which is the essential, extraordinary view
and doctrine of the early translation school. You keep alive and spread by the light of
wisdom. Lord of Dharma, great kenpo, I pray at your lotus feet. In the palace of the ogman
Darmadhatu, the essence of all the Buddhas of the three times, the one who shows clearly
the Dharmakaya of my own mind, we pray to the honorable root guru, glorious root teacher,
precious one, dwelling on the lotus seat on the crown of my head. Hold me with your great
kindness and bestow the accomplishments of body, speech and mind.
And I'm sorry, I had just a couple more thoughts that are in line with everything we just did.
But again, Buddha Shakyamuni said, Guru Padmasambhava said, in relation to that devotion and
remembering
the noble Sangha, these are unimpeded beings. And Buddha Shakyamuni said, Guru Padmasambhava
said, just thinking of me with devotion, I'm there. And that's exactly what we're doing
with our practice. Feel the presence of Guru Padmasambhava, inseparable from all the Buddhas
and bodhisattvas and our own root teacher of this life.
And then also embodied in Guru Padmasambhava, when we're saying our lineage prayers, again,
this is all Sangha. This is that unending stream, golden chain of practitioners that's
come right into our own life and heart and practice. And then a few people have asked
over time, too, in regard to the lineage prayers. We, of course, Samantabhadra, Vajrasattva,
Pramadavhadra, Sri Singha, this is kind of looking for prayer to all the lineage masters.
But here, too, the real heart of hearts that embodies the whole great perfection, all the
Buddhist teachings and lineages, but this great disoach of the, is coming down to us,
to Guru Padmasambhava, the 25 heart disciples, King Trisandetsan and all the subjects, Sozo
and Upnak, all the great, great ones at the time the Buddhist teachings came to Tibet
and helped carry that on in the early years. And all the Turtons, all the lineage masters
of our lineage were praying. And then we say this next four lines, we usually say, "In
the past, you were the Vidyadhara-nudindorjetsal. In the future, you will be the Buddha-mopataye.
Now you are the regent of Padmasambhava, the actual presence of Drogvan Latsawa. Jigjal
Yashidorjai, to you I pray." So some people have asked, "Who is this? Who are we talking
about here?" We're talking about His Holiness, Dudur Rinpoche, is one of our great lineage
teachers who's very close. And then in particular here, people also have asked, "Who is the
Vidyadhara-nudindorjetsal?" So if I'm remembering correctly, I went and looked a little bit
at Rinpoche's teachings. But the Vidyadhara-nudindorjetsal was a great Vidyadhara in a whole
another
aeon, even outside of this fortunate aeon. And I'm forgetting, there was a Buddha at
that time, and forgive me, I'm forgetting that Buddha's name. And this was one who'd
realized that Buddha's teachings, the Vidyadhara-nudindorjetsal, and I think he was also a teacher
for a great king, Yookun Song, who had said had a thousand, or even a thousand and two
sons, princes. And that king had some degree of clear sight, and saw that all these sons
had great beautiful qualities, and would really be great protectors, and of great benefit
for beings. And again, this was in a Buddha's time, and an awakened culture of that Buddha's
teachings, taking them to heart. And so the king asked this Vidyadhara-nudindorjetsal, "Would
you please clarify more about what will be some of the after effects, or the benefits
and fruits of these beings? When and where they'd be the most benefit?" And so nudindorjetsal
did a big empowerment ceremony, and in part of that, he had a big fancy vase, and he put
the name of each one of the princes in the vase. And essentially what he foretold was
that each one of these sons would become a Buddha of this Aeon, which is a fortunate Aeon,
in which not just one Buddha, but a thousand Buddhas, or even a thousand and two Buddhas
appear. And as part of the empowerment was, during the empowerment ceremony, as each one
of the princes received at random from the vase, it foretold in that great harmony the
order in which they would take birth in this fortunate Aeon. So in that sense, the Vidyadhara-nud
indorjetsal
is kind of known as because he gave this empowerment and foretold this. In a way, the father of
all the Buddhas of this fortunate Aeon and this nudindorjetsal, far along ago in another
Aeon, came into this world as dudur-nudindorjetsal. So that's why it's saying, "In the past, in
the future, you will be the Buddha Mopataye." So again, in this fortunate Aeon, where one
thousand Buddhas appear, Mopataye is said to be the final Buddha of this fortunate Aeon
before the end of this Aeon. And so dudur-nudindorjetsal is foretold to be the final Buddha of this
fortunate Aeon. And then now you are the regent of Patmasambhava. So dudur-nudindorjetsal was
known as the living regent of Patmasambhava in this time, and it was the presence of Draupin
Lhotzawa. And Draupin Lhotzawa was one of the twenty-five heart students of Patmasambhava
at the time the teachings were being established in Tibet. Jigdril Yeshedorje,
light of fearless, indestructible wisdom, you know, it's another name of dudur-nudindorjetsal.
So that's, in a nutshell, just a few people had asked about that. And again, kind of relating
back to Sangha and lineage, all the different directions, all these great supports are coming.
And then these next four lines, happy with little, content and rich in jewels of the three train
ings,
with loving compassion, seeing all beings as parents, through threefold realization, you
made three doors, three vajras. Who's this? So this is actually a prayer to Lama Cime Namjal
Rinpoche, who was our great teacher. Many of us had the great fortune of meeting and being with.
This is Kenpo Selandongya Rinpoche and Kenchin Poldenshera Rinpoche's father, both Dharma father,
as well as physical father. And so this is a prayer to him. And Pima Tsutram was his
ordination name when after he became a monk. So anyway, and then the next prayer I think
we all know is to Kenchin Poldenshera Rinpoche. So I just wanted to clarify that. So thank
you for the extra time. So now in the presence of all these great ones, we'll continue. We'll go to
our calling the Lama from afar, which is page 18 in the nundra of sadhana.